---
author: "todd"
categories: 
  - "field-notes"
  - "texts"
coverImage: "Screen-Shot-2019-12-24-at-17.03.20.png"
date: 2019-12-24
id: 2598
slug: "how-luv-is-research-in-part-part-1"
title: "How LUV is research, in part (part 1)"
type: "post"
---

_\[\* For the LUV site, this is part one of a set. Let’s call it the Elpenor Set. See part two, [here](https://luvhurts.co/texts/some-tenets-of-elpenor-thought-part-2/).\]_  

The purpose of this 'entry' is to introduce Ismar Tirelli Neto. I'm writing a book right now. It's called Variations in Worldmaking. I can't wait until it's finished because it might be driving me crazy. It's like birthing a set of gremlins ... or so it presently seems. The book covers the span of my three durational, multi-stakeholder, rights-focused works. [freeDimensional](http://www.freedimensional.org/) was a ten-year focus on free expression, artist safety and shelter. [Lanchonete.org](http://lanchonete.org/) was a site-specific (São Paulo) five-year focus on the right to the city. And, Luv 'til it Hurts is a two-year focus on HIV and stigma. I chose to begin the book in the same time period as the two years of LUV, July 2018-2020. I thought that one process might help the other. At least in my head. They are both (art) works. I am applying a methodology for durational, multi-stakeholder, rights-focused projects that has been developed over the course of freeDimensional, Lanchonete.org and in giving support to other projects, in the making of Luv 'til it Hurts. I think the same can be said for the making of Lanchonete.org drawing on lessons learned from freeDimensional, but I was not concurrently writing criticism in that instance. Ishmar is working with me on the book, and also features in the book. We started conjuring these relations during a [poetry workshop](https://www.facebook.com/events/resid%C3%AAncia-s%C3%A3o-jo%C3%A3o/exercicios-no-outro-oficina-de-escrita-com-ismar-tirelli-neto/657361218021544/) he offered at São João Farm Residency in Rio State (Brasil), and now we meet weekly for a writing class. Below is Ishmar's 'opener' from an excerpt of the book in which I describe its 20 characters.   
  
After reading his LUV intro, I hope you'll check out [Some tenets of Elpenor thought](https://luvhurts.co/texts/some-tenets-of-elpenor-thought-part-2/) , a text I refer to in my research. When we met in July 2019 I was already thinking about the role of 'hero' as it pertains to the art world. And, after we set on working together, I noticed it coming up again in a Whatsapp discussion with egosumfrank ([Part 1](https://luvhurts.co/encounters/metamorphine-machine-furiosa-xxxs-psyche-pictorial-part-i/) and [Part IV](https://luvhurts.co/encounters/metamorphine-machine-furiosa-xxxs-psyche-pictorial-part-iv/)) and [MetaMorphineFuriosaXXX](https://luvhurts.co/coalition/metamorphinemachinefuriosaxxx/), one of our esteemed 'coalition' members. Therefore I mention Ismar's work in these as well as a previous LUV piece, [Character Development à la Proust](https://luvhurts.co/encounters/character-development-a-la-proust/).   
  
\*\*\*  
  
I met **Ismar Tirelli Neto** at São João Farm Residency in Rio State. He offered a poetry / writing workshop on his ideas around Elpenor, the youngest of Odysseus’ co-patriots. He is building up a body of thought and writing around Elpenor and other anti-heroes. We spoke of a quest for methodological understanding, and too about levels of protectiveness of text. I am not protecting the text right now. I am letting it flow rather unbounded. The numbered characters are a parameter as are the set of ‘devices’ I’ll share next. The characters and devices intersect in a matrix. I am coming up with this approach and language while also asking Ismar about his approach and the literary form it takes. We are both attracted to the Elpenor character and able to discuss it in terms of contemporary politics and a natural tendency of the art market to both crave and manufacture heroes. We ask ourselves together how does one share observations, texts, gestures, forms and/or criticism under today’s societal and market-enforced conditions on expression. In making a durational project, the idea cannot be immediately revealed. The idea is becoming, but already imagined. There is no need to rush it. The timespan is tailored for it to have enough time to fructify. This holding back as conscious effort brings ones awareness to territorialisms, competition, ranking, showboating, acceleration, pedigree-toting tendencies that can result in hero-making by default. The market needs the heroes because they are brand names, and that sells in primary and secondary art markets as well as through affiliation. Power and money are traded along these lines. It is not often that these resources can be convened and deployed for a social urgency. The market cannot both destabilize and stabilize in perfect ways. If art wants to make a radical work or gesture, it must first pass muster with the relative patrons who hold the purse strings to the semio-capital that BIFO speaks of. The same resources may be enough to resolve social ills or convene urgent conversations. It would first need to be configured or sequenced in a way that these social priorities held priority over sales and relation to market. Let’s face it: such a set-up is very rare. So, what of the ‘art hero’ role, and can it be bypassed while still offering up big ideas for the future. And to a public.
